ENDURANCE SESSIONS (E)
Endurance sessions (E) focus on developing the aerobic system, by causing beneficial cardiac
hypertrophy, increasing heart strength, improving oxygen delivery, and enhancing the
vascular network. Strength-endurance also falls under the E umbrella in this program.
Improving these parameters are the backbone of a solid aerobic base, and will skyrocket your
level of conditioning when done correctly and in the right amounts.
Endurance sessions are longer duration and fit the stereotypical ‘cardio’ image. You’ll find
traditional LSS work, running, ruck marching, and cycling. Each training session will have its
own rules.
There are a few conditions that have to be met, for all the good aerobic system adaptations to
happen;
Duration – it takes a minimum of 30 minutes to induce the adaptations we’re looking for.
For best results, E work should be performed for 45-60 minutes plus.
Low Intensity – you shouldn’t be working hard. You should be working long. If you’re
running or cycling, you’ll want to be at a low enough level of intensity that you can have a
conversation. Some of you will have to slow yourself down. Remember, pushing too hard
causes the heart to work in a different way which won’t give us the adaptations we’re looking
for right now. Not only that, but increased cortisol plays an issue when you increase intensity.
So harder isn’t better. You want to keep the activity relatively the same pace throughout, so
no intervals or interruptions that’ll either spike the heart rate too high, or drop it too low.
There are exceptions to this (i.e. ‘Fun-runs’).
You don’t need a ton of variety. If there are one or two E sessions you like, you can keep
repeating them. No need to go down the entire list. When doing E work, I personally stick to
LSS running, because it’s convenient, easy, and very effective for improving aerobic
performance. Tailor your exercise selection to your needs. If you’re starting a military
contract, then you’ll want to focus on simple LSS running, ruck-march sessions and fun-runs.
Leave the cycling and other stuff to the side.
Dosage – you need the right dose of E sessions. Not too much, and not too little. You’ll pack
as much of it in as you can during Block I, which is the proper time and place for it. After
that if you go with Black Protocol you’ll be doing far less, and if you go with Green you’ll be
doing more. If you’re an operator or grunt-military, work in the upper ranges during your E
sessions; 60-120 minutes plus.
E sessions might be boring and repetitive for those of you into short duration work capacity
style workouts. Just grit your teeth, carry on, and think about all the performance enhancing
changes it’s making to your cardiovascular system. It’s only temporary.

64

ENDURANCE SESSIONS
1. LSS
2. Ruck Up
3. Triples
4. Fun-Run – Standard Issue
5. Fun-Run – Cannonball Run
6. Fun-Run – 03 at Stupid-Dark 30
7. Warrior Run
8. Strength-Endurance Circuits
1. Bodyweight Cluster
2. Barbell Cluster
3. Kettlebell Cluster
4. Dumbbell Cluster

65

1. LONG STEADY STATE (LSS)
Run
Cycle
Swim
Row
x 60 Minutes
Unglamorous, but very effective for what we’re trying to accomplish. Choose one of the
above activities and perform it for 60 minutes, or as prescribed in your protocol. The intensity
should be low, and the pace relatively steady. You should be able to maintain a conversation
while working. Slow yourself down if you have to. Work for time, not distance. As you
progress you’ll notice you’ll cover the same distances more quickly which is a good
indication of progress. I cannot stress enough the importance of low intensity here. It’s not
necessary to have a heart rate monitor, but if you do you should be in the 120-150bpm or
50%-70% of max heart rate range. If you think you’d be having trouble holding a
conversation, you’re working too hard. If you’re not sure if you’re working too hard, go
slower. Err on the side of slower. ‘Comfortable’ should describe your pace. Do not throw in
intervals, sprints, or go out of your way to run up hills. If there happen to be a few hills on
your route, that’s okay, not a big deal – take them easy.
Basic Version:
Start with one of the activities on the list you find easy. Aim to complete 30 minutes of work
or movement. Gradually increase the time over the weeks as your performance improves.
Work toward completing 45-60 minute sessions. If you’re running and you need to stop every
so often and walk that’s fine. Because you’re out of shape, your heart rate is most likely still
in the work zone, just don’t rest so long that it drops back to fully rested. Again, you don’t
need a monitor, just start running again before you feel completely rested, while you’re still
breathing with a little exertion. A walk-run-walk session is totally acceptable if you’re entry
level/beginner.
Advanced Version/Operators:
Increase the duration to 90-120 minutes +

66

2. RUCK UP
Ruck March with a 50lb load
90 minutes
Use a backpack, or military ruck. You can choose to wear boots, or runners. If you’re starting
a military contract, I suggest you get used to wearing issue boots and issue ruck. You can get
both relatively cheap at surplus stores. Try getting the equipment identical to what you’ll be
using during Basic/Infantry school etc.
March at a pace quicker than a stroll, with purpose. You want to get your heart rate roughly
in the 120-150bpm range, or working at 50%-70% of max heart rate. Not necessary, but if
possible choose a route with a few hills and uneven terrain.
If you’ve never gone hiking or carried a ruck, make sure that whatever you’re carrying is not
going to hammer against your back. If you’re carrying weights, kettlebells or hard objects,
swaddle them in towels or a pillow before putting them in your ruck. Otherwise it’ll keep
banging up against your lower back and can get very uncomfortable over time.
Basic Version:
Start with a lighter load 20-30lbs, and / or start with 30-45-60 minutes.
Advanced Version/Operators:
Increase the duration to 2-4 hours +
And/or increase the load to 80lbs – 100lbs +
Alternative Version:
Work for distance instead of time. Choose 3-10 mile routes depending on your skill level, and
attempt to complete them as quickly as possible WITHOUT breaking into a jog or run.

67

3. TRIPLES
Jump Rope

10 minutes

Run

10 minutes

Row

10 minutes

x 2 circuits
Triples are a relatively easy way for variety junkies to get through steady state style aerobic
work. It can be done inside, and is a great alternative to LSS if the weather’s not co-operating
or you simply want to change things up.
The key to this workout is low intensity and ease. The focus should be on steady work, at a
pace that allows you to hold a conversation. Easy skipping, slow run, and easy rowing.
I’ve had trainees ask about incorporating kettlebell swings or burpees, but both are a little too
intense for this session and will likely take your heart rate out of the desired target zone. Aim
to work approximately within 120-150bpm or 50%-70% of max heart rate.
There is no rest period between each activity. Immediately after skipping, start your run,
immediately after running move on to rowing. There is no rest between circuits.
Basic Version:
Complete 1 circuit
Advanced Version:
Complete 3-4 circuits
Alternative Versions:
Run/Row/Stationary Bike
Heavy Bag work /Step Ups/Easy effort battling ropes
Outdoors: cycle/run/swim or run/swim x 15-20 minutes each (‘doubles’)
Jump rope/Step-ups/Pad Work
Use your imagination and string together 4, 5, 6 or more different exercises if desired. Only
choose exercises that can be performed at a low intensity.

68

MILITARY FUN-RUNS
Fun-runs have been evoking dread in military and special operations personnel for decades.
Almost every infantry, spec ops, or elite police tactical team in the world uses some variation
of the Fun-Run. They’re usually used for selection courses and designed to force less
motivated or poorly conditioned candidates to drop out. They can be run for several hours,
and have many different painful variations. We’ll be using scaled down versions, as we’re
trying to build you up to improve your conditioning, not break your body down to force you
to quit.
Fun-runs are great tools to prepare for bootcamp, selection courses, and adventure racing.
They develop aerobic capacity, muscular endurance and anaerobic performance to a high
degree. Use a combination of Fun-runs, ruck marches and plain old running, and you’ll be far
more prepared than 99% of the recruits at boot/basic, or infantry continuation.
Use them sparingly during Block 1, don’t use more than one of these per week. When
possible, use them at the end of the week before a recovery day.
These should become a staple for you if you choose Green protocol, particularly if you’re
going to be starting a military contract.
If you’re just a beginner, some of these might initially be too difficult for you to complete.
I’m thinking of the weighted / kettlebell runs in particular. The bodyweight fun-runs should
be fine. Once your conditioning levels improve, they’ll still be here waiting for you. You’ll
have an opportunity to try them out during your continuation protocols.
If you’re a rank beginner, you’ll want to put your focus on the fundamentals for Block I.
Mostly long steady state running/Triples etc. Build up your capacity for longer work before
trying to jump into the deep end. That being said, like every training session in this book, I’ve
included a ‘Beginner’ and ‘Advanced’ version. So if you want to dip your toe in the Fun-run
water, look at the Beginner versions.
INDOORS:
With a little ingenuity most of these Fun-Runs can be done indoors using a treadmill, or even
a rowing machine, bike or stair-master in place of jogging. I recommend heading outside and
doing them as outlined to get the full experience, but if you can’t because of weather,
logistics or time, then the indoor versions will suffice.

69

4. FUNRUN: STANDARD ISSUE
10km LSS Run
A - Burpees x 10
B - Squats x 20/Push-ups x 20
Set your watch to sound off every 6 minutes. Run your 10km route at a comfortable pace.
50%-70% of max heart rate. When your alarm goes off, drop and do ‘A’ or 10 burpees. Get
up and continue running. When your alarm goes off a second time, stop and do ‘B’, or the air
squats and push-ups. Continue running. Each time your alarm goes off, alternate between ‘A’
and ‘B’ until you’ve completed your 10km route. There is no rest period when switching
between running and exercises.
Basic Version:
5km LSS
A – Burpees x 5
B – Squats x 10/ Push-ups x 10
Advanced Version:
10km LSS
A – Burpees x 10/ Squats x 50 / Push-ups x 30
ALL 3 exercises are done every 6 minutes.
OR
10km LSS
10-15lb weight vest
A – Burpees x 10
B – Squats x 20/ Push-ups x 20
Alternate between A and B every 6 minutes.

70

5. FUNRUN: CANNONBALL RUN
3 Mile LSS Run
A – Kettlebell Swings x 10
B - Goblet Squats x 10
C – Push-ups x 10
For this little gem start out with a kettlebell or dumbbell you can easily swing one handed.
Generally in the 12kg-24kg range for men, and 8lb-16kg range for women. You’ll also need a
backpack to put your kb in for the run. Pad that sucker with a pillow, towels, small blankets
or whatever. Before you head out ensure that you can run with the kb snugly on your bag,
with minimal movement. It is extremely important to secure and pad that weight in your
pack. Pillows folded around the bottom of the KB work very well.
Set your timer to go off every 7 minutes. Run at a slow, comfortable pace. When your alarm
goes off, stop, pull your kb out and perform exercise ‘A’, or 10 KB swings. You can do them
two handed, one handed, or change it up. Just get the bell up 10 times. Immediately put it
back in your pack and continue running. Next time your alarm goes off, stop and do ‘B’, or
the KB Goblet squats. Next stop, do the push-ups while leaving the KB on your back. Every
7 minutes of running alternate between doing ‘A’ and ‘B’ and ‘C’ until your 3 mile run is
complete. You should start feeling it nicely in your hamstrings and back. Trying to run after
kettlebell swings is a real treat.
If you’re using a dumbbell, leave the db in your backpack and do the squats while wearing
the weighted pack.
There are no rest periods. Don’t take too long putting your kettlebell back in your pack after
the exercises. You want to be up and running again quickly after each set of exercises. Use
the slow comfortable running as time to recover.
Basic Version:
1.5 Mile LSS Run
Advanced Version:
6 Mile LSS Run
And / Or
A – Kettlebell swings x 20
B – Goblet squats x 20
C – Weighted Push-ups x 20
You can also increase the weight of the kettlebell you use.

71

72

6. FUNRUN: 03 AT STUPID-DARK 30
Run x 6 Miles:
A – Push-ups x 25, Squats x 25
B – Mountain Climbers x 50
C – Burpees x 10, Sit-ups x 25
This pleasant run was introduced to me by a former Sgt in the Marine Corps. This Sgt would
take his squad for a long run at an uncomfortably quick pace. You kept up or you didn’t. At
various intervals A, B, or C was performed. If you were behind on the run, you would have to
stop and complete the exercise, even if the rest of the squad was just finishing up and getting
up to start running again. The pace was modified for no one. As you can probably imagine, if
you started falling behind on any aspect of this run, it would be easy to compound that lag
and fall far back, making it a superhuman effort to catch up. There was usually a Cpl at the
back of the pack ensuring that stragglers completed A, B or C when they reached the exercise
stops. The last one back to barracks was given any menial or undesirable tasks. This style of
Fun-run has been used as a selection tool by various high speed army units across the world.
Sometimes done in combat boots, and run for several hours at a relatively quick pace.
For our purposes this will be a run for time. Set your timer to go off every 7 minutes. When
your alarm sounds the first time, you’ll drop and do ‘A’ as quickly as you can. Then you’ll
get up and continue running for another 7 minutes, as quickly as you can. Time stops when
you’re doing the calisthenics and starts up again when you get up and begin running. Next
time your alarm goes off, do ‘B’. Continue cycling through A, B, and C every 7 minutes until
your 6 mile run is complete. Your goal is to finish the 6 mile run as quickly as you can.
The quicker you do it, the less stops you have to make. Needless, to say, your pace won’t be
comfortable or slow as it is with the other LSS sessions/Fun-runs.
The mountain climbers are done per leg. So 25 kicks per leg for a total of 50. Not 50 per leg.
The sit-ups are done immediately after the burpees.
Basic Version:
Run x 2-3 miles
A – Push-ups x 10, Squats x 15
B – Mountain Climbers x 20
C – Burpees x 10, sit-ups x 10
Advanced Version
Run x 8-10 miles
A/B/C same as standard version.

73

74

7. WARRIOR RUN
45 Minutes
Run as far as you can in 45 minutes. Record your distances over the year. Good to include
once every couple months or so to chart your progress. Use sparingly.
Basic Version:
30 Minutes
Advanced Version/Operators:
60 Minutes

75

8. STRENGTH-ENDURANCE CIRCUITS

Exercise#1
Rest 30-120 seconds
Exercise#2
Rest 30-120 seconds
Exercise#3
Rest 30-120 seconds
…..etc.
Choose a cluster of 5 to 8 exercises. You can use barbells, dumbbells, bodyweight exercises
or a mix of both. Check your template for number of circuits and reps you’ll be doing. You’ll
set up your work area with all the tools/exercises you need before starting the circuit. You
don’t want to waste time finding your weights or tools while you’re in the middle of it.
Timings are important for this session. Here’s an example session where the trainee has been
assigned 3 circuits x 30 reps, with the following cluster:
Push-ups x 30
Squats x 30
Barbell rows x 30
Back hyperextensions x 30
Dips x 30
Hamstring curls x 30
Rest 2 minutes
x3
So you’ll start with push-ups, do 30, and then rest for 30-120 seconds. Then you’ll move on
to squats. You’ll do your assigned number, rest for 30-120 and continue making your way
down the circuit. After you’ve completed one full circuit, you’ll rest for 2 minutes and repeat.
The lower you can reduce your rest intervals, the better. You can reduce the rest intervals
between exercises to zero if you choose and if you’re able. This is an exercise in improving
muscle endurance, not strength.
There are going to be many instances where you cannot complete all assigned reps for a
particular exercise all at once. That’s fine, rest-pause as needed until you’ve squeezed out all
reps. Then take your rest interval before moving on to the next exercise. Over time, where in
the past you would fail at 20-25 reps, eventually it’ll creep up to 30-40, and then, ultimately
50 or higher.
Barbells and dumbbells are great to incorporate in your SE circuits. Use approximately
15%-30% of your 1 rep maximum for the exercises you choose. Another great option is doing
bodyweight circuits while wearing a weighted vest.

76

If you’re interested in doing a serious Strength-Endurance phase of training, refer to Green
Protocol – SE Template in Part 1.

77

SE EXERCISE CLUSTERS
Below are several cluster/circuit examples.
You can also create your own. Choose 5-8 exercises that cover off all your major body parts.
What I mean by this is don’t use a circuit consisting of just chest exercises. Choose exercises
you won’t be waiting in line to use, as that’ll disrupt the short rest intervals necessary for
enhancing muscular endurance. Bodyweight, dumbbells, kettlebell circuits, and barbell
complexes are all excellent choices. You can mix and match modalities within your circuit;
you can combine kettlebells with bodyweight, dumbbells and barbells and so on.
The driving principles behind SE are light resistance, high repetition, and short rest intervals.
Don’t get too hung up on the amount of weight you’re using. If using dumbbells and barbells,
use roughly 15%-30% of your estimated 1 repetition maximums. No need to actually test. If
you find you’ve gone too heavy, just drop some weight.
Think about how your exercise selection fits in with the parameters of circuit training. For
example, say you want to include barbell bench press. That fits and is a perfectly acceptable
exercise to use for SE development. But will you have access to that bench for all of your
circuits when you need them? Do you train at a gym that allows you to leave your
bar/weights on the bench while you go do the rest of your circuit? A simple fix for this is to
do a floor press or use dumbbells instead. The point I’m trying to make is make sure you can
access each exercise on your circuit immediately without waiting for minutes at a time. A
shorter rest interval is needed for success with SE circuits. You don’t want to be waiting for
minutes at a time to do the next exercise on your list. Let’s say this happens even though
you’ve taken precautions. Let’s say you’ve chosen kipping pull-ups as one of your exercises.
Good choice, pull-up bars are usually unoccupied in most gyms and there are sometimes
more than one kicking around. So you do your set, and you move on to the rest of your circuit
– you come back for round two, and find someone just getting ready to do a set of pull-ups on
your bar. No problem, just skip it and move to the next exercise on your circuit. When your
bar becomes unoccupied, head back and complete your set, tick it off the list.
Another thing you want to think about is type of exercise. With SE, our reps are going to be
in the 20-50 range. Some of you are not going to be able to complete all prescribed reps
without stopping intermittently and taking short rest-pauses before continuing. That’s fine,
that means you’re on track, and that’s how SE training works. But you don’t want to sabotage
yourself with exercises that are too difficult to complete for high reps. Things like one armed
push-ups, pull-ups and handstand push-ups come to mind. Let’s say you can squeeze out 3
one armed push-ups with great difficulty. Is it really a good choice for an SE phase where
you’ll be asked to perform 50 reps?
There are exceptions to this. Let’s say you can already do around 15-20 pull-ups, and you
want to include them in your circuit. If you have the time, and you understand you’ll be
spending a lot of that time on the pull-up bar when you come to it – then have at it.
Understand you’ll be at that pull-up bar until your set of 20-50 is done. Rule of thumb, be
able to do 15 to 20 reps of a ‘higher tension’ more challenging exercise before using it.
Exercises that fit into this grey area include the aforementioned pull-ups, pistol squats, and
one armed push-ups. A lot of this is going to depend on your existing level of
strength/muscular endurance. A trainee that can do 20 pistol squats per leg, might benefit
78

from including pistols in an SE circuit. That trainee’s maximum numbers in the pistol will
improve, and he’ll reap the benefits of improved SE. On the other hand, a trainee struggling
to do 3 pistol squats per leg, will not. That trainee is better off including pistols in a
maximum strength program until he can do 15-20 per leg.
None of this applies to the more regular exercises such as push-ups, crunches, air squats etc.

79

BODYWEIGHT CLUSTER
Push-Ups
Squats
Kipping Pull-ups or Inverted Rows
Bicycle Crunches
Dips
Back Extensions
To make this SE Circuit more challenging or to create progression, use a weight vest or
backpack with an additional 5-10lbs.
I’m not a fan of kipping pull-ups for building strength or anything else - but they fit for our
strength-endurance goal because we’re interested in moving the muscles at a low intensity,
for longer periods of time. With SE our reps will range from around 20 to 50, so regular pullups are not going to work as well for the average trainee.

80

BARBELL CLUSTER
Push Press
Front Squat
Row
Bench Press/Floor Press
Shrugs
Romanian Deadlift
You can do the entire circuit using the same barbell/weight. Remember the goal here isn’t
resistance or how much weight you can lift. It’s all about high repetition. So make sure you
keep the weight very low – 15%-30% of your 1 rep max if I had to assign a number. You
could do the above circuit with an Olympic bar and a couple of 10s or 5s and you’d have the
right idea.

81

KETTLEBELL CLUSTER
Swings
Goblet Squat
Renegade Rows
Single Arm Floor Press
Kettlebell deadlift
Kettlebells and SE circuits are a perfect fit.
Any exercise that has you do one arm/leg/part first and then the other – you’ll divide the reps.
For example the single arm floor press, if the circuit calls for 30 reps – you’ll do 15 per arm.

82

DUMBBELL CLUSTER
Bench/Floor Press
Lunges
Rows
DB Push Press
Squats
Lying Leg Raises
All the exercises above (except the leg raises) are done with a pair of light dumbbells. Again,
roughly 15%-30% of your estimated 1 rep maximums. In other words, go light. If a session
calls for 30 reps, i.e. 30 lunges – that means 15 per leg, or 15 per arm in the case of dumbbell
rows.
MIXED SE CIRCUITS
The above are all cluster examples. You can create your own circuit using a mix of tools. Mix
up kettlebells, bodyweight work, barbells, etc.

83

HIGH INTENSITY CONDITIONING
(HIC)
HIC sessions are divided into three broad categories, with plenty of overlap between each.
They are as follows:
HICs#1-24 – Aerobic/Anaerobic
Sessions 1-10 are a mix of aerobic and anaerobic work. Some continue to train the aerobic
system and facilitate the transition to anaerobic work. These sessions might not be what you
typically think of as ‘aerobic’ work. They’ll include maximum effort intervals, hills, burpees
and sledgehammer work. They contribute to aerobic capacity in some way, whether it’s by
increasing heart strength, improving energy combusting mitochondria, or by developing
greater tolerance to lactate. Certain HIC sessions might appear similar to anaerobic work, but
slight differences in the methods cause different adaptations. Sessions 11 to 24 primarily
focus on developing the anaerobic systems. These sessions will frequently require repeated
near maximal efforts, with short rest intervals that are over before you are fully recovered.
Don’t get too concerned with the differences, just know you’ll get a mix of aerobic and
anaerobic work here.
HICs#25-36 General Conditioning
GC sessions focus on developing work capacity and general physical fitness. Generally
speaking, work capacity is the ability to do more in less time. To increase the volume of work
you can handle and recover from. As you can probably surmise, this is extremely important
for both your strength training and conditioning. The more you can handle + recover from =
the more you can do over time. That’s why many of these GC sessions are done “for time.”
GCs also bring various energy and strength systems together in different and random
quantities to perform in a single session. Most of your training isolates fitness domains, GC
makes them work together as a team. Very applicable to ‘real life’ situations. This is the time
and place for laundry-list style sessions.
HICs#37-40 Power Development
These sessions incorporate barbell work, plyometrics and track intervals to develop power,
explosiveness and power-endurance.
The bulk of your HIC sessions should come from #s 1 to 36 using a mix of
Aerobic/Anaerobic + General conditioning. Avoid doing only AA, or only GC. Mix it
up.
Sprinkle in Power Development occasionally or as needs dictate.
Follow the guidelines provided with each HIC session. If the session calls for you to be fully
rested before a maximum effort, then be fully rested. Don’t go before you’re ready, thinking
84

by making it harder, it’ll be ‘better’. Nope. If there’s a set, shorter rest interval, then make
every effort to adhere to that rest interval, even if you’re not fully recovered.
Here’s an example using one of my favourites, 600M Resets. This session calls for maximum
effort 600M laps, with a long 3-5 minute rest interval in between each lap. This particular
session is designed to increase cardiac contractile strength, and is a very beneficial aerobic
adaptation. If you don’t rest as long as you should between laps, you won’t get that
adaptation because you won’t have the energy to provide that maximum effort. So if you
think you’ll make this session more challenging by cutting down your rest intervals, you’re
shooting yourself in the foot and totally missing out on the benefit you’re supposed to be
getting.
Now on the other hand there are also sprint sessions that call for short rest intervals, 60-90
seconds or less. They’re usually designed to improve lactic/alactic capacity. For these
particular sessions, you need short rest intervals to get the benefits. Too long of a rest and
your body won’t receive enough of a stressor to adapt and improve that parameter.
My point is, stick to the guidelines provided with each HIC training session. Don’t try to
make sessions harder or longer thinking more is always better. That’s an amateur mistake.

85

HIC AEROBIC-ANAEROBIC:
1. Connaught Range 10 to 1s
2. Fast 5
3. 600M Resets
4. Heavy Bag Resets
5. Indoor Power Intervals
6. Sledge Drill
7. BOO
8. BOO II
9. Fobbit Intervals
10. Short Hills
11. Oxygen Debt 101
12. Speed-Endurance Ladders
13. Meat Eater
14. Meat Eater II
15. Disarmed
16. Standard Issue Hills
17. Apex Hills
18. Bloody Lungs
19. Bloody Lungs II
20. Anaerobic Capacity
21. Pepper Pot
22. Buffalo Laps
23. Meat Eater III
24. Devil’s Trinity – Combat Conditioning Circuit

86

HIC General Conditioning:
25. GC# 1 aka Beat Your Face
26. GC# 2
27. GC# 3 aka Brig Rat
28. GC# 4
29. GC #5
30. GC #6
31. GC #7
32. GC #8
33. GC #9
34. GC #10
35. GC #11 aka Outside the Wire
36. GC #12
HIC Power Development
37. BW Plyometric Power
38. Power Complex
39. Kinetic Conditioning
40. Transition Complex

87

1. CONNAUGHT RANGE 10 TO 1s
10 Burpees
100m sprint
9 Burpees
100m sprint
8 Burpees….
To
1 Burpee
Find a football field or track. Any space that gives you 100 meters of running room works.
Do 10 burpees and sprint 100 meters. Do 9 burpees and sprint back to your starting point. Do
8 Burpees and sprint 100 meters. Shuttle run style. Keep repeating until you’ve made your
way down to 1 burpee. Your goal is to complete as quickly as possible. This session
originates from a member of the RCMP’s elite federal Emergency Response Team. 10 to 1
burpees in this fashion were frequently incorporated during morning PT for ERT candidates.
Basic Version:
Start with 5-1s. Work up to 10.
And / Or decrease the run to 50 meters
Advanced Version:
Increase the sprint distance to 100 meters.
And / Or add in 10 squats – so burpees and squats are both done at each stop in 10-1 fashion

88

2. FAST 5 TEMPO RUN
5km/3 mile run - 80%-85% max heart rate
This run should be at a faster pace than your LSS work. You should be going fast enough that
you cannot hold a conversation easily. Get a little bit outside your comfort zone for this one.
Basic Version:
Start with half the distance if necessary. Work up to the full distance.
Advanced Version:
Increase the pace/and or distance to 4-5 miles

89

3. 600 METER RESETS
Sprint/Run 600M Maximum Effort
Rest 3-5 minutes
Repeat x 6
You’ll notice something very significant about this workout. You will be resting in between
efforts for a long period of time, about 3 to 5 minutes. The benefits of this session come
about by exerting maximum effort from a rested state. Read that again if you have to. You
are not doing yourself any favours by sprinting your next rep while you’re still exhausted.
That kind of training can be found elsewhere in this book and serves a different purpose.
Think of it like strength training for the heart. You want to be well rested for a high intensity
effort. This session assists in developing strength of cardiac contraction, and enhances
mitochondria amongst other things.
This is best done at a track, but any 600m running space will do. Before you begin the
session, jog for 5-10 minutes at comfortable slow pace to warm up and get the blood flowing.
Stretch if you have to.
Each 600M rep is run at a maximum effort. Then you rest and recuperate for a relatively long
time (3-5 minutes) and repeat for the remainder of the session. I repeat, be relatively well
rested before each rep. There are other sessions where you won’t have lengthy rest intervals.
This is not one of them.
Basic Version:
4 reps
Advanced Version:
10 reps

90

4. HEAVY BAG RESETS
Heavy Bag Strikes x 90 seconds – Maximum Effort
Rest 2-5 Minutes
x 5 rounds
Similar in principle to the 400m resets. Intense activity springing forth from a well-rested
state. Use any type of striking you like; straight punches, kicks, knees, elbows or combos, as
long as it’s a maximum all-out effort for 90 seconds. Your goal is to meet the 90 second
deadline. After each 90 second rep, rest for 2-5 minutes and repeat. Treat that bag like it’s an
opponent trying to take your life. You explode into maximum effort, from a relatively well
rested state. Your intensity and power might start to fade out part way into the drill, that’s
natural. That’s where you enter the training zone that takes your ability to the next level– just
keep pushing through the fatigue with whatever force you can muster until that alarm sounds.
Even if you start looking like a slow drunken monkey. For this session, if you like, you can
do some very light skipping or stretching to pass the time in between rounds.
Basic Version:
4 rounds and/or x 60 seconds maximum effort instead of 90
Advanced Version:
Up to 10 rounds and/or increase striking to 2 minutes.
This is a great HIC session to tack on after a strength training session when you’re already in
the gym. You can also use it standalone and add a core or grip finisher after.

91

5. INDOOR POWER INTERVALS
2 Minute Treadmill Run/ Airdyne/ Row - Max Effort
3-5 Minutes rest
x5
I’ve included this session for convenience. It’s for those that can’t always get to a track, or
are dealing with uncooperative weather. It has all the benefits of the 600 Meter Resets, but is
an indoor version.
The key here is to work at close to full speed, a ‘maximum effort’. This isn’t going to be an
all-out sprint with a two minute duration, but it shouldn’t be that far behind. Push it as hard as
you can for the two minute interval. It’ll be roughly 80%-90% of your maximum heart rate.
Remember, you’ll get a chance to rest up for a relatively long time in between reps, so don’t
be afraid to push it. You’ll see dramatic increases in your cardiovascular ability if you
regularly train these 2 minute max effort intervals. If running, set the treadmill to a pace
that’s ballpark 80% or more of your 100m sprint speed and sustain that effort for 2 minutes.
Then slow right down to a walk and reset/rest for a full 3-5 minutes. Be relatively well rested
before your next all-out 2 minute effort.
Depending on the quality of your treadmill you might have to use the incline to add challenge
to your 2 minute effort. Make sure you get a feel for the speeds, don’t go flying off the
treadmill and hurt yourself. Don’t get too caught up in getting the speed exactly right. Your 2
minutes should be a hard effort, but with a pace you can sustain for that length of time. To
give you some idea, on treadmills with maximum speed level 12, I’ve used level 9-11 as my
max effort speed. This is of course going to vary from treadmill to treadmill, and individual
ability.
This along with 600 Meter Resets will have a significant impact on your cardiovascular
development. We’re all used to sessions that have us working hard for 20 to 60 seconds.
Making an adjusted maximum effort for 2 minutes really takes your game to the next level.
Again, I want to emphasize, make sure you’re well rested before each maximum-effort rep.
Take up to 5 minutes if needed. When you’re well rested, you’re in a better position to make
that max effort.
Basic Version:
1 Minute maximum effort reps. Work up to 90 seconds and then 2 minutes, over time.
Advanced Version:
Complete up to 10 reps
Alternative Versions:
Stationary bike/ Airdyne/Row

92

93

6. SLEDGE DRILL
Sledgehammer / Tire Strikes x 1 Minute
Jump Rope x 1 Minute
Sledgehammer/ Tire Strikes x 30 Seconds
Jump Rope x 30 Seconds
Rest 2-3 Minutes
x5
Alternate hands/grip occasionally when doing the sledge strikes. You want powerful
consistent effort that you can maintain, but not quite an all-out effort. So you’re focusing on
repeated powerful blows with the sledge, without going crazy. Just a nice sustained effort for
the duration. This is an anaerobic threshold type training session, designed to increase the
amount of time you can work at near maximal efforts. It has the added benefit of strengthendurance, power-endurance, and work capacity.
Basic Version:
3 Rounds
Advanced Version:
1 Minute for each of the four movements
5 Rounds
Alternative Versions:
Dumbbell or Barbell Push-Press in place of the Sledge/Tire

94

7. BLACK ON OXYGEN
(aka BOO)
Kettlebell Swings x 60 seconds (or 30 swings)
800m Run
2-3 minutes rest
x5
I learned this nasty little session when training with a former US Army Ranger. He was
employed by a private contracting company (PMC) at the time we crossed paths. It’s the solo
variation on a partner drill. With the regular version, you partner up and head out to the track.
One of you starts kettlebell swinging, the other starts running the 800 meters. When the
runner finishes up his two laps, you switch up. The runner starts KB swinging, and the other
runs 800 meters. And you keep going continuously for a set amount of rounds. If you have a
training partner, try the partner version once in a while.
Now here’s the solo version. Take a kettlebell to the track. Around 16kg – 32kg for men, with
roughly 24kg being about the mean. 8-24kg for women.
The goal of this session is continuous higher intensity work for several minutes.
Do one or two handed Russian style kettlebell swings at a consistent comfortable pace for
one minute. Remember to switch hands halfway through. Some of you might have to put the
KB down before the minute’s up – that’s fine, rest briefly and continue. After the minute’s
up, immediately drop the kb and run 800m as quickly as you can. Come back to your
kettlebell and rest for 2-3 minutes before the next round. For this session, stick to 2-3 minutes
of rest, you don’t have to be fully recovered between sets today.
Basic Version:
x 3 Rounds
Advanced Version:
Use a heavier KB
Or
Use the same kettlebell as in standard version, but swing for 2 minutes instead of 1.

95

8. BOO II
10 Burpees
800m run
5 Burpees
400m run Maximum Effort
Rest 2-3 minutes
x3
Aim to complete each round as quickly as possible. Your initial 800m pace is not going to be
a sprint, but it should be faster than a jog. After the 800, you’ll immediately drop and do 5
burpees. And then get up and hit that final 400 meter lap with maximum effort. After the
circuit’s done, rest and repeat. Once again, you do not have to be fully rested between rounds
for this one, try not to go over the RIs.
Basic Version:
5 Burpees/400m run/5 burpees/400m max effort run/Rest 2-3 mins x 2 Rounds
Advanced Version:
20 burpees/800m run/10 burpees/400m max effort run/ Rest 2 mins x 3-5 Rounds

96

9. FOBBIT INTERVALS
Treadmill Run/Row/Skip x 2 Minutes
Kettlebell Swings x 20
Run/Row/Skip x 2 Minutes
Kettlebell Snatch x 10/arm
Repeat x 20 Minutes
For this one you’ll set the treadmill at a pace slightly slower than a jog. If a comfortable
treadmill jog is level 5, set it to level 4.
One or two handed kettlebell swings can be used. You can use different weights for your
swings and snatches as well, if you choose.
Jog for an easy 2 minutes, step off the treadmill but leave it running. Perform the kb swings
either one or two handed. Immediately get back on your treadmill, and make note of the time.
Mentally mark off 2 minutes. After that two minutes passes, you’ll step off the treadmill and
perform 10 snatches per arm. Keep repeating until your treadmill reads ’20 minutes’. Your
treadmill timer isn’t going to match up neatly, your swing and snatch intervals may take more
or less time every time.
Basic Version:
Do only 10 reps for the swings and 5 reps/arm for snatches.
And/or
Shorten the session to 15 minutes.
Advanced Version:
Use heavier kettlebells and/or
Increase session to 30 minutes.
Alternative Versions:
Jump rope/ row/ stationary bike/ stair climber instead of treadmill
Dumbbells instead of kettlebells
Barbell or dumbbell push-press instead of kettlebell snatch

97

10. SHORT HILLS
Hill Sprint
30-60 second rest
x 10
For this particular hill sprint workout, you want a shorter hill that takes you roughly 10-15
seconds to sprint up. Nothing longer or higher. Use the walk back down as your rest. Upon
hitting the bottom, repeat.
Basic Version:
x 5, work up to x10
Advanced Version:
x 15 – 20
and/or
Wear a weight vest/10lbs-20lbs

98

11. OXYGEN DEBT 101
200M run x 3 / 30 Seconds RI
Rest 3 Mins
x 3-4
This little gem was provided by a nationally ranked runner and former police academy
instructor. It’s designed to work the lactic system and increase pain tolerance. Sprint 200
meters at maximum effort. Rest for 30 seconds and repeat two more times. Three sprints
equals one round. Rest 3 minutes in between rounds.
Basic Version:
x 2 rounds, work up to 4 over time
Advanced Version:
Do all 4 rounds.

99

12. SPEED-ENDURANCE LADDERS
400M x 1
40 seconds rest
300M x 1
30 seconds rest
200M x 1
20 seconds rest
100M x 1
10 seconds rest
Work your way back up the ladder in reverse. Sprint 100M, rest 20 seconds, sprint 200M, rest
30 seconds etc.
All running is done at maximum effort. SE Ladders are an effective way to improve speedendurance.
First, work your way down the ladder, starting with the 400M sprint. When you finish the last
rung, the 100M sprint, you’ll rest 10 seconds and work your way back up. You’ll start with
the 100M sprint again, and keep climbing.
Basic Version:
Work your way down the ladder. Rest a full 2 minutes at the bottom before working back up
the ladder.
Advanced Version:
Work your way up and down the ladder continuously as many times as possible. Down and
back up is one round. Do multiple rounds. Use a 2 minute rest interval at the bottom of the
ladder if necessary in between some rounds.

100

13. MEAT-EATER
100M Sprint
Russian Kettlebell Swings x 20 (24kg-48kg)
Walk Back to Start
x 10
Use a moderate/medium heavy kettlebell. Lay the kettlebell on the track 100 meters away,
near the finish line. Sprint with maximum effort to the kettlebell. Immediately pick up the
kettlebell and start swinging. When you’re done, turn around and walk back to start. I prefer
two-handed swings, but can be done with one. Repeat x 10.
Basic Version:
x 5, and start with a lighter kettlebell if required
Advanced Version:
Complete this session for time, as quickly as possible. This means you can jog back to start
instead of walk.
And/or use a heavier kettlebell.
Alternative Version:
Use a dumbbell for the swings instead of kettlebells

101

14. MEAT-EATER II
10 Russian Kettlebell Swings
10 Burpees
Rest 60 seconds
x 10 rounds
For Time
Deceptively simple, highly effective. I recommend using a medium/heavy (for you) kettlebell
and using two-handed Russian swings. If you only have access to light kettlebells, do one
handed swings, but do 10 per arm.
It doesn’t matter if you start with the burpees, or the kettlebells.
Basic Version:
x 5 rounds, use a lighter kettlebell if necessary
Advanced Version:
Challenge yourself with a heavier kettlebell, one that you can barely swing for the full 10
reps. Leave a swing or two in the bank to maintain form if necessary.

102

15. DISARMED
10 Burpees
Heavy Bag Strikes x 2 Mins
Rest 60 Seconds
x 3-5 rounds
Finisher:
Plank & Shank – 3 Minutes
x3
Work hard during the heavy bag portion. Steady strikes, along with combos approaching
maximum effort and speed. After you’ve completed the main workout, rest for a minute or
two and move on to the plank and shank finisher. Do 30 seconds of each until three minutes
is up. You can rest after each plank and one shank round for 30-60 seconds if required. So it
would look like this; plank 30 secs/shank 30 secs/ rest 30-60 secs. Repeat two more times.
Basic Version:
Heavy bag strikes x 1 minute instead of 2
Advanced Version:
Heavy bag work x 3 minutes

103

HILL TRAINING
If I was only allowed one conditioning exercise for the rest of my life, it would be hill sprints.
Nothing builds your legs, heart, lungs and willpower like hill sprints. Hills are to conditioning
what barbells are to strength. Hills are a cyborg-factory.
One of the fittest people I know does nothing but 2-3 hill sessions, along with 3 barbell
strength sessions per week. That’s it. He is an absolute beast.
After you complete Block I, I highly recommend you make hill sprints a staple in your
continuation protocol. I’ve provided several variations that start from the very basic, right up
to the extremely challenging. Some of these variations will incorporate your favorite tools
and exercises, such as kettlebells and burpees.
A note on hill ‘distances’. Since hills vary in length and incline, and you’re limited by
geography, it’s pointless assigning specific distances/sizes.
If you only have access to a shorter hill (5-10 seconds to sprint up), then compensate by
doing more reps, and vice versa. Don’t get too caught up in the size of your hill, it can’t be
controlled, and you will reap all the benefits regardless.
But, if I had to assign some sort of measure, I’d say find a hill that takes you 30-40 seconds
to sprint up.

104

16. STANDARD ISSUE HILLS
5-10 Hill Sprints
1-2 minutes rest intervals
This is the standard issue, basic hill sprint session. Don’t let its simplicity fool you. It’ll
probably do much more for your conditioning than complicated workouts involving 10
different exercises with 20 different toys.
You can walk down the hill, or jog. Once you get to the bottom, your rest interval starts.
Maximum effort and speed up the hill.
Don’t get hung up on finding the perfect hill, but aim for something that takes you 30-45
seconds to sprint up if you can. If you can only find a ‘short’ hill that takes 10-15 seconds,
then simply double the reps.
Basic Version:
Start with 3-4 rounds and work up to 5 – 10 over time. Extend the rest intervals between
sprints to 3 minutes.
Advanced Version:
Jog back down/no rest interval at the bottom.

105

17. APEX HILLS
Hill Sprint
10 Russian Kettlebell swings
Walk down
Rest 1-2 Minutes
x 5-10
This is one of the simplest and most effective conditioning sessions in the book. This is a
personal favorite and staple in my own conditioning program. It’s simple, scalable, flexible,
and will turn you into a machine. I like using a heavy kettlebell with two handed swings for
an added power/strength element.
Set the kettlebell at the top of the hill. Sprint up to it with maximum effort. Bang out 10 crisp
powerful Russian swings. Set the KB down and walk back down to the bottom. Rest interval
starts at the bottom of the hill. If you don’t have an easily accessible hill you can drive to,
then make a day of it and hike out to it with your kettlebell secured in a backpack. Ensure it’s
comfortable, because chances are you’ll be very tired on the hike out.
Basic Version:
Start with 3-4 rounds, work up to 10 over time. And/or use a lighter kettlebell if necessary.
Advanced / Operators:
Jog back down to the bottom and eliminate the rest interval between rounds – the jog down
becomes your recovery period.
And/ or use a heavier kettlebell or even double kettlebell swings.
Operators work up to using the 48kg (Beast) kettlebell for 15+ rounds
Alternative Versions:
Use dumbbells
Do Snatches instead of swings

106

18. BLOODY LUNGS I
10 Plank Push-ups
Hill Sprint
10 Burpees
Walk Down
x5
Start at the base of the hill. Do 10 plank push-ups. The version we do has you start out in the
plank position, push up one elbow at a time. From this upright position do one complete
regular push-up. Now you’re back in the upright position. Move back down to your starting
plank position, one elbow at a time. That’s one repetition. Once you’ve completed 10, sprint
up the hill with maximum effort. Perform 10 burpees at the top. The walk back down is your
rest period.
Basic Version:
You can incorporate an extra 1-2 minutes of rest at the bottom of the hill after walking down.
And/or
Perform 5 plank push-ups/burpees instead of 10
Advanced Version:
x 10 rounds
and/or
jog down the hill/instead of walking
Operators consider using a weighted vest 10-20lbs
Alternative Version:
This is best done using a hill, but if you absolutely can’t find one, because you live in
Saskatchewan or something, then you can do a 400M max effort run in place of the hill
sprint.

107

19. BLOODY LUNGS II
10 Burpees
Hill Sprint
5 Kettlebell/Dumbbell Snatches/arm
Walk Down
Rest 1-2 mins
x 5-10
With this more difficult version of Bloody Lungs, you’ll leave a kettlebell or dumbbell at the
top of the hill. You’ll start off with burpees, immediately sprint up the hill. At the top, pick up
the kettlebell and perform 5 snatches per arm. You can use a dumbbell in place of the
kettlebell. You can also use push-presses or swings in place of snatches.
Basic Version:
x 5 rounds, work up to 10 over time. Use a lighter kettlebell to start if necessary.
And/or use swings instead of snatches (10 swings).
And/or 5 burpees
Advanced Version:
x 10+ rounds
And/or perform 10 snatches per arm.
And/or jog instead of walk back down to start
And/ or eliminate the rest interval between rounds
Operators: consider wearing a weight vest 10-15lbs

108

20. ANAEROBIC CAPACITY

Jog 800m
Sprint 400m
Jog 800m
Sprint 400m
Jog 400m
Sprint 200m
Jog 400m
Sprint 200m
Finisher:
50 Plank Push-ups
This is best done at a track. Your sprints will be roughly 90%-95% of maximum effort. The
above sequence is done continuously with no rest intervals – the jogging serves as a bit of a
recovery period. After you’ve completed the session, perform 50 plank push-ups.
Basic Version:
Do 25 plank push-ups
Advanced Version:
Weight vest 5-10lbs
N/A

109

21. PEPPER POTTING
Rucksack/Backpack/ Weight Vest: 30-50lbs
1.5 Mile Route or 30 minute hike
Pepper Pot x 100M every 5 Minutes
This is more of a specialist drill. This is for you if you’re preparing for bootcamp or infantry
training. This exercise is patterned off infantry contact drills, fire and movement, or ‘pepperpotting’ as it’s called in some places. It also happens to be a good way to develop
anaerobic/aerobic capacity along with strength endurance and load bearing.
Find a 1.5 mile long route, a hiking trail or path is perfect but anything will do. Strap on a
rucksack, backpack or weight vest, with a 30-50lb load. Set your timer to go off every 5
minutes.
Every time your timer goes off, you’re going to pepper-pot for roughly 100 meters. Your job
is to get across 100 meters as fast as humanly possible. What this means is you’re going to
break into a run. However, every 4th or 5th step, you’re going to stop, and get on one knee.
Make sure that knee touches the ground. Stay there for two seconds. Then you’re going to get
up as quickly as you can for another short bound. Take a knee again. Continue like this until
you get across the 100 meters. Your goal is to get across that 100M as quickly as possible.
Basically it boils down to bounding for a few yards, and then taking a knee, repeatedly until
you get across that 100Ms. When I say 4th or 5th ‘step’, I’m referring to each footfall. So left,
right, left, right, left, down. If you don’t want to count footsteps, another trick is to mentally
say to yourself ‘up-he-sees-me-down.’ On the up you’re getting up, running as far as you can,
on the ‘down’ you’re immediately back down. As you can see, your bounds should be very
short. To go military-geek, you’re simulating moving while under fire, so, you don’t want to
stay upright and running long enough for someone to put you in their sites and pull the
trigger. Without fail, as people get more and more tired, their bounds get longer and longer,
which makes them an easier target. Or they stay down on the ground longer and start resting.
If you catch yourself starting to do this, have the discipline to cut your bounds short. Your 5
minute timer re-starts after you complete 100M of pepper potting. Get through this 1.5 mile
route as quickly as possible. The longer you take, the more pepper-potting you will have to
do. I don’t recommend this one unless you’re starting a military contract – it’s a very
occupationally specific drill. I wasn’t initially going to include it in this book. We normally
use it strictly for clients preparing for bootcamp or infantry continuation training. It helps
break in ruck muscles, gets clients used to working in combat boots, and gets them familiar
with contact drill movements.
Basic Version:
Start with a lighter load: 20-25lbs
Advanced Version:
Use heavier weight, work up to 80lbs+
110

Alternative Version:
Find a football/soccer field and use a 50-100 meter stretch. Wear no weight or ruck,
bodyweight only.
Get from one end to the other as quickly as possible, but roughly every five meters drop and
do two burpees. Rest 2 minutes when you reach the end of your route. Turn around and
repeat.
x 3-5 rounds

111

22. BUFFALO LAPS
Burpees x 10
400M Run
2 Handed Kettlebell swings x 10 (or 20 if 1 handed)
Rest 45-60 seconds
x 4 Rounds
This session was submitted by a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who used it
to decrease his PARE time. The PARE is an RCMP physical fitness test designed to simulate
the energy systems used for chasing, and wrestling with/arresting a suspect.
Aerobic/anaerobic systems, and strength/power come in to play. The PARE is set-up in
circuit fashion, with several easy obstacles/stairs, ending in a push-pull device designed to
test strength after exertion. There is a time limit, with members averaging anywhere from 2
1/2 to 4 1/2minutes. The constable that submitted this session, used it to decrease his PARE
from 3:15 to 2:54 which is significant. Anything in the two minute range is generally
considered to be in the highest percentile and relatively few RCMP members are capable of
sub 3 minute PARE times.
4 rounds of the above are done as quickly as possible for time, with no rest interval.
Basic Version:
Rest 60 seconds between rounds.
Advanced Version:
Use double kettlebell swings
Alternative Version:
If you don’t have access to kettlebells, you can use a dumbbell instead. Go for one handed db
swings, 5 per side.

112

23. MEAT-EATER III
Double Kettlebell Clean and Press x 10
300 m sprint x 1
Lunge 100m Back to Start
x 4-6 Rounds
This session focuses on strength, power, and anaerobic system development. Use two
kettlebells of equal weight at the starting line. Perform 10 double kettlebell (or dumbbell)
clean and press. Drop the kettlebells and sprint 300 meters. If you’re at the track, you’ll lunge
the remaining 100 meters back to your starting point, back to your kettlebells. Repeat
Stick with moderate weights to start, roughly 16kg-32kg. Scale as necessary.
Basic Version:
Do 5 kb C&Ps instead of 10
Skip the lunges and walk back the remaining 100m as your rest interval.
Advanced Version:
.Use heavier kettlebells/do 6 rounds +
Alternate Version:
If you only have one kettlebell, do 10 swings per arm/followed by 10 presses per arm

113

24. DEVIL’S TRINITY
COMBAT CONDITIONING CIRCUIT
Kettlebell Swings x 1 Minute
Burpees x 1 Minute
Heavy Bag x 1 Minute or Spar x 1 Minute or Shadowbox x 1 Minute
Rest x 1 Minute
x 5 Rounds
This deceptively simple, but very challenging session was provided by a British para. This
was done solo or with a partner. When doing the partner version, the two paratroopers would
spar with each other in place of the heavy bag work. For the solo version, set your timer for
one minute rounds. Start with kettlebell swings (one or two handed) and do as many as you
can within the minute. 12-24kg for men, and 8-16kg for women, scale accordingly. When
your timer sounds immediately move on to burpees, and then finally the heavy bag.
Maximum effort on the heavy bag, you can mix it up with straight punches, knees, kicks and
elbows. Rest for one minute and repeat.
Basic Version:
2-3 Rounds
Advanced Version:
Work up to doing all 5 rounds without using the rest interval
And/or use double kettlebell swings
Alternative Version:
If you have a training partner, do light sparring in place of the heavy bag
Or Pad drills
If you don’t have a heavy bag, shadow box while holding a pair of light dumbbells

114

GENERAL CONDITIONING SESSIONS
HIC sessions#25-36 develop work capacity, and general physical fitness. Many of the energy
systems you’ve been developing will be brought together at varying intensities and durations.
Do not use these as the sole source of your HIC work. Mix them up with the
aerobic/anaerobic HICs #1-24.

115

25. GC 1
(aka BEAT YOUR FACE)
Burpees x 3 Min
Rest x 3 Min
Burpees x 2 Min
Rest x 2 Min
Burpees x 1 Min
Rest x 1 Min
x 1-3 Rounds
Instead of push-ups, you’ll be beating your face with burpees. How many burpees you can do
in a set amount of time is a great indicator of general conditioning. When performing this
session, do as many burpees as you can in the prescribed amount of time. Record your results
and compare over time.
Basic Version:
Start with 1 round, work up over time.
Advanced Version:
Burpees x 5 Min
Rest x 2 Min
x 3-4 Rounds
And/ Or wear a weight vest + 5-15lbs for added challenge

116

26. GC 2
10 Pull-ups
10 burpees
10 squat jumps
10 Plyometric push-ups
….9/8/7/6/5/3/3/2/1
For Time
Perform 10 pull-ups, 10 burpees, continue moving down the list. After you finish the first
round, repeat with 9 pull-ups, 9 burpees, etc. continue doing this until you reach 1 in this
descending ladder fashion.

117

27. GC 3
AKA Brig Rat
Burpees x 30 sec
Dips x 30 sec
Burpees x 30 sec
Squats x 30 sec
Burpees x 30 sec
Back Extensions x 30 sec
Rest 1 Min
x 3-5 rounds
Squats are body-weight. A plank can be used in the place of back extensions. A plank can
also be used every other round in place of back extensions.
Basic Version:
N/A
Advanced Version:
Wear a weight vest +10-15lbs for added challenge

118

28. GC 4
Pull-ups x 100
Run 400M
Push-Ups x 100
Run 400M
Kettlebell/dumbbell swings x 100
Run 400M
x 1 Round/For time
Can be done indoors using a treadmill or rower for the 400s. Or step out of the gym and run
roughly 400m and come back in for your next exercise.
Basic Version:
Do only 50 reps per exercise
Advanced Version:
Use a heavy kettlebell 48kg+ or double kettlebells
And/ Or x 2 Rounds

119

29. GC 5

A
Max Dips x 1 Min
Rest 90 seconds
Max Push-ups x 1 Min
Rest 90 seconds
x 3 Rounds
B
5 Pull-ups
10 Burpees
x 3 Rounds
Dips can be done at dip station or using rings. Complete ‘A’ entirely, rest 2 minutes and
move on to ‘B’.
Basic Version:
Dips + Push-ups x 30 seconds
Advanced Version:
Use a weight vest for dips/push-ups/pull-ups and/or burpees

120

30. GC 6
Sledgehammer/Tire Strikes x 10
Burpees x 5
Squats x 10
x AMRAP 5 Minutes
Rest 60-90 seconds
x3
Cycle through the sledge/burpees/bodyweight squats as many times as you can in 5 minutes.
Rest for 60-90 seconds and repeat. Total of 3 rounds. If you don’t have access to a
sledgehammer and tire, you can substitute kettlebell or dumbbell swings.
Basic Version
N/A
Advanced Version
10 Burpees instead of 5
5 rounds +
And/ Or wear a weight vest 5-15lbs

121

31. GC 7

Burpees x 50
Squats x 50
Diamond Push-ups x 50
Run 800M
x 3 Rounds
For Time
Basic Version:
x 1-2 Rounds
Advanced Version:
100 reps for each exercise
x 3-5 Rounds

122

32. GC 8

A
Kettlebell/Dumbbell Snatch x 10/Arm
Box Jumps x 25
Hanging Knees to Elbow x 25
Dips/Ring Dips x 25
Burpees x 5
4 rounds for time
B
Handstand – Static Hold x 60 Seconds
Rest 2-3 Mins
x3
Complete all of A first before moving on to B. You can support yourself against the wall
when doing the static handstand holds.
Basic Version:
Do 2 rounds of A
Do 1 round of B
Advanced Version:
N/A

123

33. GC 9

A
Pull-up x 3
Burpees x 5
Squats x 10
Complete as many rounds as possible in 10 minutes
B
10 x 100M Sprints
Complete all of ‘A’ before moving on to ‘B’. Aim for continuous work when doing ‘A’.
Basic Version:
5 x 100M sprints instead
Advanced Version:
Do muscle-ups instead of pull-ups

124

34. GC 10
A
Jog 2 Minutes
Burpees x 25
x 4 Rounds
B
Core or Grip Finisher of your choice
This session can also be done indoors with the use of a treadmill or rowing machine in place
of the jogging. The jogging portion should be approached as active recovery, and the burpees
should be completed as quickly as possible.
Basic Version
Burpees x 15
Advanced Version
Burpees x 50
And/ or wear a weight vest 5-20lbs

125

35. GC 11
(aka OUTSIDE THE WIRE)

A
Sprint x 100M
Bear Crawl x 50M
x5
For Time
B
100 Sledge/Tire Strikes
For Time
Get through both A and B as quickly as you can. For A, there’s no rest period in between
sprinting and bear crawling. Immediately transition.
Basic Version:
N/A
Advanced Version:
Wear a weight vest 5-20lbs
Alternative Version:
Do 10 Muscle-ups for time in place of the sledge/tire strikes
Do 50 pull-ups for time in place of the sledge/tire strikes
Do 100 kipping pull-ups for time in place of the sledge/tire strikes

126

36. GC 12

A
1.5 Mile Run
For time
B
Barbell Push-Press x 20
Back Extensions x 20
Pull-ups x 20
x 3 Rounds/ For Time
For barbell push-press, use a light weight – approximately 15%-30% of your estimated 1
repetition max. No need to strictly calculate, just guess and err on the side of going lighter.

Basic Version:
1-2 Rounds of B
Advanced Version:
N/A

127

POWER DEVELOPMENT
HIC sessions# 37-39 focus on developing power, power-endurance and explosiveness. These
sessions should not make up the bulk of your HIC training. Barring any specific goals,
choose the majority of your HIC from sessions #1-36. Sprinkle in power development
occasionally.

128

37. BW PLYO – POWER

A
Explosive Plyometric Push-ups x 10
Rest 90 Seconds
Explosive Jump Squats x 10
Rest 90 seconds
Explosive Plyometric Pull-ups x 5-10
Rest 2 Minutes
x 3 Rounds
B
50M sprints x 5
Your plyometric movements should be explosive and crisp.
Basic Version:
x 2 Rounds
And / Or 5 plyometric pull-ups
Advanced Version:
N/A

129

38. POWER COMPLEX

Barbell Push-Press x 5 / 60% -70% 1RM
Rest 1-2 minutes
10 Double kettlebell/dumbbell squat jumps 8kg-24kg
Rest 1-2 minutes
Kettlebell/Dumbbell Snatch x 5/arm 8kg-24kg
Rest 1-2 minutes
5 plyo pull-ups
Rest 1-2 minutes
x3
All exercises to be performed with maximum speed and explosiveness, but under control
with good form at all times.
Perform the push-press explosively. Fast on the up. Slower/controlled when lowering the bar
back to start. Use roughly 60% - 70% of your estimated one repetition maximum. You don’t
want to go too heavy or too light, the goal is to move that weight with speed and
explosiveness.
Same principle for the squat jumps, perform with maximum power. If it helps, you can jump
up onto a box, but it’s not necessary. Dumbbells can easily be used in place of kettlebells for
both the squat jumps and snatches.
For the pull-ups, grasp the bar and pull yourself up as forcefully and quickly as you can until
your chin is at the level of the bar or over it. Then release immediately and drop down from
the top position. For this session, no need to lower yourself down under control. Just let go of
the bar and drop. This is an exercise in power development, not maximum strength.
Basic Version:
x 2 rounds, work up to 3
Use the lighter end of the weight spectrum if necessary.
Start with 3 plyo pull-ups instead of 5.
Optionally, use bodyweight jump squats.
Advanced Version:
N/A
39. KINETIC CONDITIONING
Sprint 50M + Explosive Plyometric Push-ups x 5
Rest 2 Minutes

130

Sprint 50M + Explosive Squat Jumps x 5
Rest 2 Minutes
x3
This session is designed to increase your power, speed and explosiveness. The trick behind
this one is to perform each exercise at maximum intensity. Perform as explosively,
powerfully, and quickly as you can.
Notice the longer two minute rest interval. This is done on purpose so that you’re fully rested
between each maximum effort. You’ll only get the full benefit of this session by exerting a
maximum effort on each rep – so it’s paramount that you’re well rested between attempts.
Take more than two minutes of rest if needed. Err on the side of more rest for this one.
Basic Version:
x 2 Rounds
Advanced Version:
N/A

131

40. TRANSITION COMPLEX

Front Squat x 3 (85% 1RM)
Squat Jumps x 10
Rest 2 Min
Standing Overhead Press x 3 (85%1RM)
Plyometric Push-ups x 10
Rest 2 Min
Weighted Pull-ups x 3 (+10-50lbs)
Medicine Ball Slams x 10
x 2-3 Rounds
The heavy standard lifting (squatting/bench etc) primes your system for power work. After
completing your set of front squats, immediately rack the bar, step back and perform 10
powerful, explosive squat jumps (bodyweight). Rest a couple minutes, and move on to the
next exercise. Estimate your 1rms if needed, no need to be exact. Just ensure you’re lifting
heavy for front squat + SOHP + weighted pull-ups.
Basic Version:
Bodyweight pull-ups instead of weighted pull-ups
Advanced Version:
Do muscle-ups in place of pull-ups
Do plyo pull-ups in place of medicine ball slams
Alternative Version:
Do 10 plyometric or kipping pull-ups instead of medicine ball slams

132

CORE + GRIP
I’ve included a handful of core and miscellaneous workouts, including the ‘Plank & Shank’
finisher that can be tacked on at the end of regular training sessions. You’ll also find an
intensive core focused stand-alone session, and sessions designed to improve grip work,
power and speed.

1. TB Plank & Shank
2. Full Core
3. Quarterdeck Core
4. Progressive Grip Circuit

133

1. PLANK & SHANK
Plank 1-5 minutes
Shank 1-5 minutes
Rest 1-2 minutes
x 1-3
The Plank & Shank is a quick all-in-one core training session, and makes a good finisher. The
‘plank’ is self-explanatory, the ‘shank’ refers to a static back extension/hyperextension. I
have no idea why they’re referred to as ‘shanks’ in this case. This was the term used by the
training cadre that first introduced me to this combo. So I’m going to go with it. It rhymes
and rolls off the tongue nicely. You can call it whatever you like.
The shank’s best performed off a back extension bench. You’re simply going to hold your
back in the top position of a regular back extension. Like a reverse plank for the back. Just
hold it for the designated amount of time. Don’t do any up/down reps. Keep your spine
relatively straight. You’re simply holding a back extension at the top of the movement.
Some of you may be surprised at how difficult it is to hold the shank position, even if you can
deadlift a horse. It’s a good way to strengthen weak links in the posterior chain.
There are a couple ways to plank & shank. You can simply plank for 1-2 minutes take a short
break and do the same for shank/repeat. Or you can superset. Plank for a minute, then
immediately shank for a minute, for a certain number of rounds before resting and repeating.
Or you can plank for longer than you shank, or vice versa.
Basic Version:
Plank and Shank for shorter reps to start – roughly 30-60 seconds for each movement. Work
up to lengthier holds.
Advanced Version:
Hold a weight when shanking, or wear a weight vest for both plank and shank.
Use lengthier reps – 2 minutes + for each hold.
And / or get rid of the rest interval. Keep moving from one hold to the next for as many
designated time cycles as you can.

134

2. FULL CORE
A
Romanian Deadlifts x 100 (20-30% 1RM)
Rest 3-5 Minutes
Hanging Knees to Elbows or Hanging Leg Raises x 100
B - Finisher
Plank & Shank x 3 (60 sec plank/45 sec shank x 3)
This isn’t a finisher, this is a complete core focused session in and of itself. Simple,
minimalist, and highly effective. Do sets of 3, 5, 10, 20, or more for your deadlifts and
hanging leg raises. Rest as necessary.
I favor this minimalist approach to training. Rather than doing 10 different versions of situps, medicine ball throws, and leg raises, I like selecting the least possible number of highly
effective movements and hitting them hard.
Basic Version:
50 Deadlifts/Leg Raises instead of 100
Advanced Version:
Weight vest for plank & shank
And/ Or hold a weight when shanking

135

3. QUARTERDECK CORE

Plank Push-ups x 10
Back Extensions x 10
V-Ups x 10
Ab wheel/Rollout x 5-10
x 5-10
This is another good core finisher. It has a focus on the abdominal muscles along with some
posterior chain development. Squats, deadlifts and overhead presses do work the core to
some degree, but mostly the rear/posterior chain. They don’t activate as much of the rectus
abdominis (abs) as you think. So every once in a while it’s good to put some direct focus on
your abdominal muscles. I’ve minimized posterior/rear core work in this one, because the
majority of the sessions in this book, along with your regular strength training, include things
like kettlebell work, squats, deadlifts and presses. So this is a good finisher to tack on to one
of your more posterior chain-heavy workouts.
The ab-rollouts can be done with a barbell if you don’t have an ab roller or ab wheel. Google
for video demonstrations. Rest as necessary between your roll-out sets.
Complete 5-10 rounds, rest as necessary.
Basic Version:
Perform 5 sets
Advanced Version:
Wear a weighted vest 10-20lbs.

136

4. PROGRESSIVE GRIP CIRCUIT
100M Farmer’s Walk
10 DB Overhead Presses
100M Farmer’s Walk
10 DB Forearm Reverse Curls
100M Farmer’s Walk
10 DB Shrugs
100M Farmer’s Walk
10 DB Hammer Curls
Rest 2-3 minutes
x 1-3
Use the same pair of dumbbells for the entire session. You won’t be going very heavy right
away - the way you might with a straight Farmer’s Walk, due to the length of the session and
the exercises. Start out with a conservative weight. I recommend 20-50lbs per dumbbell for
men, and 5-30lbs per DB for women. Scale as necessary.
This is normally done at a 400 meter track, but any 100 meter stretch will do. Your goal is to
get all the way around the track and do all the exercises without putting the dumbbells down.
Farmer’s Walk for 100 meters, stop and do the first exercise – 10 dumbbell presses. Continue
walking without rest or putting the DBs down for another 100 meters. Stop and do 10 DB
forearm reverse curls. And so on until you’ve completed the lap/circuit. All the dumbbell
exercises are done both arms at the same time.
This is how long term progression works with this session. When you can get all the way
around the track without putting the dumbbells down, bump the weight up by 5-10lbs per
dumbbell. When you can’t get all the way around the track, break the session into segments.
Complete the first segment (100m walk + 10 DB presses) and then put the dumbbells down
for a brief rest. Pick up and continue. Rest briefly after the second segment (100M + DB
forearm curls) and continue. Work up to doing two segments in a row, then three and finally
all four. Boom. Bump the weight up again by 5-10lbs per dumbbell. Over time, your goal is
to go heavier and heavier with the dumbbells.
This doesn’t have to be done at the track, you can do it in your gym. Instead of walking the
100 meters, you’ll simple hold the dumbbells by your side for 90 seconds between each
exercise. The static hold replaces the walk. So start off the session by holding the dumbbells
by your side for 90 seconds. Then perform the presses. Back down to your sides for 90
seconds. Then do the reverse forearm curls. Etc. There are no basic/advanced options for this
exercise.

137

138

CHALLENGE SESSIONS
If you want to truly test your limits, and brush up against the extreme, then these challenges
will be of interest to you. Totally optional, and not recommended until you’ve achieved an
above average level of conditioning.
I will warn you, these are difficult. Just completing a session is a huge accomplishment.
These sessions should not be a routine part of your training protocol. Try them once every
couple months when you’re fully rested. If you decide to do it, send me your results and any
pics, and I’ll post them up on the Tactical Barbell website. They’ll act as benchmarks for
future trainees foolish enough to try them.
1. Duku-Duku (aka Pretorian Hills)
2. Burpees for the Mentally Disturbed
3. Triska-Deka-Phobia
4. Beasting
5. Snake-Eater’s Delight

Get cleared by your physician before attempting these challenge sessions, or any other
training session in this book.

139

1. DUKU-DUKU
(AKA Pretorian Hills)
KB Goblet Squats x 5 (24kg for men/12kg for women)
Hill Run
KB Swings x 10
Walk Down
x5
Here’s the hard part;
The kettlebell can’t touch the ground for the duration of the session.
Start at the bottom of the hill. Do 5 goblet squats with your new best friend. Run/scramble up
the hill as fast as you can while carrying the KB. Carry it any way you like, as long as it
doesn’t touch the ground. At the top, complete 10 swings with the kettlebell. They can be
done one handed, or two handed, doesn’t matter. Just make the bell go up and down ten
times. Don’t put it down! Walk back down the hill carrying the kettlebell. Don’t put it down.
At the bottom, start up again with the goblet squats.
A former South African soldier introduced me to this torture session. He advised his training
cadre would occasionally use a similar version as one of many candidate selection tools or
exercises for their more elite units.
Candidates were given large iron weights, cumbersome ammo boxes, or heavy pieces of
weaponry. They were made to do various drills at the bottom of the hill, then run up the hill
still carrying their weight, for more exercises at the top. Back down, back up. As soon as a
candidate put his item down, he was done. They ran this exercise as long as needed, until they
were left with a pre-determined number of soldiers. Sometimes it was used as a
game/challenge, until last man standing. It is a test of mental toughness, will power, pain
tolerance, grip strength, cardiovascular conditioning, strength and strength endurance. It will
develop all of those qualities.
There’s a good chance, that even if you’re in great shape you won’t be able to complete all 5
rounds. So your goal is to work up to 5 rounds without putting your kettlebell down. Start
conservatively, try doing 2 rounds with no rest. Then take a break put the bell down. Work up
to 3, etc. This can be done with a dumbbell as well. And I probably shouldn’t have to say
this, but no you can’t use a backpack!

Basic Version:
Use a light kettlebell
Put the kettlebell down and rest for 2-3 minutes after every round at the bottom of the hill.

140

Advanced Version/Operators:
10 rounds.
10 Goblet squats instead of 5
32kg kettlebell / work up to the 48kg beast
A word on choosing a hill. Go with something that takes you about 35-45 seconds to sprint
up empty handed. Or go for a longer hill and go slower running up it. Either way you’ll get
the benefit/pain you’re supposed to.
Alternatively, just make do with what you have. If it’s a short hill, then do more rounds.

141

2. BURPEES FOR THE MENTALLY DISTURBED

Burpees x 10 Minutes – AMRAP
Record # of Burpees
Rest 3 Minutes
Burpees x 10 Minutes – AMRAP
For the second set of burpees, attempt to do more than you did on the first set. Don’t cheat
on that first set by pacing yourself or being conservative with your effort.
Basic Version:
5 minute rounds
Advanced Version:
Wear a weight vest+ 5-15lbs

142

3. TRISKA-DEKA-PHOBIA
Ruck March x 13 Miles (50lb load)
Run x 13 Miles
For Time
Goes without saying, drop the ruck when you’re doing the run portion.
Basic Version:
6 mile ruck + run
Advanced/Operators:
80lb-100lb Ruck

143

4. BEASTING
Ruck + 48kg Kettlebell
3 Mile March / Hike
Every 10 Minutes:
100 Russian Swings
Or (alternate)
100 Weighted Squats
For Time
Carry a 48kg kettlebell or equivalent dumbbell in your ruck. Ensure that your ruck is padded
extremely well. Perform a 3 mile march/hike as quickly as you can. Set your timer to go off
every ten minutes. Alternate between 100 swings and 100 squats every 10 minutes. Drop the
ruck when doing swings. Leave your ruck on with beast inside when doing your squats. Your
10 minute timer stops when you’re doing kettlebell work and restarts when you ruck up and
start walking again. Complete this march as quickly as possible. The longer you take, the
more swings + squats you have to do.
Basic Version:
24 or 32kg Kettlebell + 2 Miles
Advanced/Operators:
Do both swings + squats every 10 minute stop. Enjoy.
And / Or 6 Miles instead of 3

144

5. SNAKE-EATER’S DELIGHT

Day 1
10KM Ruck March + 50lbs
10KM Run
For Time
PM – Sleep Deprivation
Day 2
10KM Ruck March + 50lbs
10KM Run
For Time
So if you really want a little taste of what some high speed military selections are like, this
might be for you. Everyone comes to selection with prior skills and training. Private Jones
might be an extremely fit runner, used to doing marathon and such in his off time. Private
Smith might be able to pump out push-ups for days because he spends a lot of time in the
gym. So just because Jones can run or Smith can do hundreds of push-ups with ease, does
that mean they’re unit material? Not necessarily. An important quality is how a candidate
performs when he’s brought to his personal breaking point, or past it. If it were as simple as
using the best runners or strongest athletes, there would be very little need for selection.
Now here’s the thing. I can run Jones all day and he won’t reach that breaking point. I can
give Smith pull-ups and push-ups sunrise to sunset, it won’t tell me much about him. On a
run, Smith will probably tire out faster than Jones. But Smith can do more pull-ups than
Jones. Physical tests of endurance are one way to bring people around to that breaking point,
but what if you have a candidate like Jones who was a marathon runner or triathlete in the
past? For Jones, physical endurance may not really bring him there all the way. The military
wants to compare what Jones and Smith are both like, when they both hit that same breaking
point. So how do you get Smith, Jones, the course superstar, and the other 30 guys on
selection to the same breaking point in a given amount of time despite varying physical
ability?
The application of mental and physiological stress in addition to physical work. One tried,
true, and very effective stressor, is sleep deprivation. Sleep deprivation is the great equalizer.
Doesn’t matter how much you can bench press, how many hundreds of push-ups you can do,
or how good of a swimmer you are, you will be brought to a level of weakness the same as
everyone else after a few nights of no rack time. You can really see how someone’s going to
perform under pressure when you deprive them of sleep for a few days. Soldiers that initially
looked like superstars turn into slugs, and slugs turn into superstars. Military units around the
world have various versions of ‘hell week’ in which candidates are deprived of sleep for a
week or more. Add to that extreme physical exertion, tasks requiring teamwork and some
complexity, and you’ll start to see pretty quickly who can persevere and who shuts down.
145

Take away a meal or two, add in the elements of cold and discomfort, now we’re talking.
There’s a reason special operations units aren’t simply comprised of the military’s best
runners or strongest athletes.
This session will give you a taste of this kind of discomfort and stress.
On Day 1, perform a 10KM ruck march with a 50lb load. After your hike, drop the ruck and
run 10KM as fast as you can. Both events are done for time, complete both as quickly as
possible and record your times.
Now you’re done for the day. Now we introduce a little stress.
Stay awake for the entire night. No sleep. No catnaps.
Do whatever you like to stay awake. If you were in the military you might be setting up a
defensive position, manning a perimeter point, or out on a recce patrol. You, however, can
watch TV or play video games instead. Whatever you do, make sure you stay away.
You can begin Day 2 any time after 5AM. On Day 2, you’ll repeat the ruck and run, and
attempt to beat or match your previous day’s timings.
Basic Version:
Sleep for 2-3 hours the night before Day 2. Go to bed at 2AM, wake up at 5AM, and do the
run/ruck any time after 5AM. Sissy.
Advanced/Operators:
Do two nights of sleep deprivation in between your ruck/runs.
There is no benefit to this session beyond testing your personal limits. Sleep deprivation is
unhealthy.
This session will appeal to a certain breed. Others will have no idea why any sane person
would attempt this. If you have to ask…

146

III
EXECUTION

‘If you spend too much time thinking about a thing, you will never get it done.’
Bruce Lee

147

